---
layout: distill
title: Fixup Initialization - Residual Learning Without Normalization
description: notes on Zhang et. al
giscus_comments: false
date: 2023-03-01

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: Introduction
  - name: ResNets with standard initialization lead to exploding gradients
  - name: Main Results
  - name: Insights

---

## Introduction

Fixup (fixed-update initialization) was a concurrent work to SkipInit, but with a more complicated initialization scheme. In SkipInit, they scaled the residual branch with a trainable $\alpha$ initially set to $0$. In Fixup, the authors propose a rescaling of the initialization scheme in order to fix the gradient instability.

Authors show that a deep residual network can be trained without batch normalization and achieve same convergence speed and performance.

Quite interesting is that in Section 4.3, the authors achieve good results on remove Layer Norm in Transformers.

## ResNets with standard initialization lead to exploding gradients

This is trivially true, see the proof in the SkipInit post, where the authors show that variance of the residual explodes exponentially without using BatchNorm.

**Definition: Positively homogenous function of first degree (p.h.)** 

$f:\R^m \to \R^n$ is p.h. if $\forall x \in \R^m, \forall \alpha > 0$ then $f(\alpha x) = \alpha f(x)$ (basically if you multiply all arguments by a scalar, it's equivalent to multiplying the function by that scalar).

**Definition: Positively homogenous set of first degree (p.h.)**

Intuitively, if we have $f$ as a function of parameters $\theta$, then the p.h. set $\theta_{ph}$ is the set of parameters that the p.h. property defined above applies to: $\bar{f}(\theta_{ph}) = f(x; \theta \setminus \theta_{ph}, \alpha \theta_{ph}) = \alpha f(x; \theta \setminus \theta_{ph}, \theta_{ph})$.

For example, ReLU: $max(0, \alpha x) = \alpha max(0, x)$.

Note that a composition of p.h. functions is p.h.

I will skip the notation and only mention it where it is needed.

Assumptions:

1) $f = f_L \circ f_{L-1} \circ \dots \circ f_1$, where each of the $f_l$ is p.h. $\implies$ $f$ is p.h.
2) $\mathbb{E}[W] = 0$ and weights are i.i.d. 


## Main results

### Theorem 1

Let $x_{i-1}$ be the input to the $i$-th block. Then:

$$
\begin{align}
	\| \frac{\partial l}{\partial x_{i-1}} \| \geq \frac{l(z, y) - H(p)}{\| x_{i-1} \|}
\end{align}
$$

where $p$ is the softmax probabilities and $H(p) = \sum_x -p(x) \log{p(x)}$ is the Shannon entropy.


❗ I'm going to rewrite the proof here because it's quite simple and interesting, and because I think it is tied to the idea of input output Jacobian. The authors bound the derivative of the loss wrt to the input of the $i$-th layer. However, the loss is just one more operation applied to $x_L$, which means that the Jacobian is "close" to this equation.

Denote by $f_{i \to j} = f_i \circ \dots \circ f_j$. Then $z = f_{i \to L}(x_{i-1})$, where $x_{i-1}$ is the output from the $i-1$-th layer (and the input to the $i$-th layer), and the loss is the Cross Entropy loss. 

---

#### $f$ is p.h. wrt input

It is easy to see that $f$ is p.h. wrt the input. Since the composition of p.h. functions is p.h., it suffices to show that just one layer of $f$ is p.h. Let $f(x) = max(0, Wx)$. Then, for $\alpha > 0$:

$$
\begin{align}
f(\alpha x) &= max(0, W \alpha x) \\
&= max(0, \alpha [Wx]) \\
&= \alpha max(0, Wx) & \alpha >0 \\
&= \alpha f(x)
\end{align}
$$


---

We have that $z(x_{i-1}) = f_{i \to L} (x_{i-1})$. Then, by the p.h. property, we have that $f_{i \to L}((1+\epsilon)x_{i-1}) = (1 + \epsilon)f_{i \to L}(x_{i-1}), \forall \epsilon > -1$. 

Thus, we get at $\epsilon = 0$:


$$
\begin{align}
\frac{\partial l(f_{i \to L} ((1+\epsilon)x_{i-1}), y)}{\partial \epsilon} &= \frac{\partial l}{\partial z} \frac{\partial z}{\partial \epsilon} \\
&= -y^\top z + p^\top z \\
&= l(z, y) - H(p)
\end{align}
$$

Let $\| \frac{\partial l(x_{i-1}, y)}{\partial x_{i-1}} \|$ be the norm of the loss gradient wrt $x_{i-1}$ and $\| \frac{\partial l(x_{i-1} + t v, y)}{\partial t} \|$ at $t = 0$, be the norm of the directional derivative of the loss in the direction $v = \frac{x_{i-1}}{\| x_{i-1} \|}$ (definition from [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directional_derivative#Derivatives_of_scalar_valued_functions_of_vectors]). 

Therefore, we obtain:

$$
\begin{align}
\| \frac{\partial l(x_{i-1}, y)}{\partial x_{i-1}} \| &\geq \| \frac{\partial l(x_{i-1} + t v, y)}{\partial t} \| \\
&= \| \frac{\partial l(x_{i-1} + t \frac{x_{i-1}}{\| x_{i-1} \|}, y)}{\partial t} \| \\
&= \| \frac{\partial l(x_{i-1} + \epsilon x_{i-1}, y)}{\partial t} \| \frac{\partial \epsilon}{\partial t} & \epsilon = \frac{t}{\| x_{i-1} \|} \\
&= \frac{l(z, y) - H(p)}{\| x_{i-1} \|} & \text{Eq. 8}
\end{align}
$$

This implies that if the loss is large, then the gradients blow up, because $\| x_{i-1} \|$ is small in lower blocks.

---

### Theorem 2

This theorem bounds $\| \frac{\partial l_{avg}}{\partial \theta_{ph}} \|$, so the gradient of the loss wrt p.h. sets in the network. Proof is similar to before (see paper).

Intuitively, this theorem says that you might still get blow-up in the earlier layers of the network, since the expected gradient is lower bounded by something that can increase in depth ($\mathbb{E}[\max_{i \in [C]}z_i]$), especially since the logits are unbounded at initialization.

---

❗ @Amir - these 2 theorems basically quantify how the loss changes wrt the previous layer input, and wrt the weights. Similar to what we discussed regarding Transformers. Maybe we can measure the logits in Transformers at initialization and see if the same analysis applies.



---

Authors aim to have an initialization such that SGD steps are not influenced by depth i.e. $\| \Delta f(x) \| = \Theta(\eta)$, where $\eta$ is the learning rate.

## Insights

### Residual branches update the network in sync

In order to have an $\Theta(\eta)$ (where $\eta$ is the learning rate) step in the network output, we need each of the $L$ residual branches to have an $\Theta(\frac{\eta}{L})$ update on average.

The authors prove that what actually happens at each step is that each layer has a very tiny update, but the different layers are aligned such that the whole network incurs a drastic step in one change. This is true at least in the ReLU MLP case, with residuals (see appendix).

In Theorem 3, the authors show how the network output update $\Delta f(x_0)$ depends on the update on the parameters $\Delta \theta$.

### Study of a scalar branch

The authors show how to initialize residual branches such that SGD updates change the network output by $\Theta(\frac{\eta}{L})$ updates in each branch.

Note: The stochastic gradient of a layer is almost orthogonal to its weight. This affects the equilibirium,

They insert multipliers on each residual branch (see [https://arxiv.org/pdf/1706.05350.pdf]).